Create transaction privacy page #175 (#349)
BitcoinDesign/Guide: guide/payments/privacy.md

> ---

Reviewer: Make sure to enable the page on the Payments section landing page.

layout: guide
title: Transaction privacy
description: An overview of how to help users maintain their financial privacy while using Bitcoin.
nav_order: 4
parent: Payments
permalink: /guide/payments/privacy/
main_classes: -no-top-padding

> image: /assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/privacy-preview.jpg

Reviewer: If I was super picky, I'd complain that this image is 1200x620px and should be 10px taller. Doesn't hugely matter overall, unless you don't want the blue frame in the image to be cropped.

Author: oooof. my bad. to be fair my artboard was originally set up as 630 height and then I freehand sized a clipping frame. who wrote that contributing checklist?

---

{% include picture.html
    image = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/header.jpg"

>     retina = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/header@2x.jpg"

Reviewer: That image is 5MB. Generally, the images are huge. In a quick test via [ImageOptim](https://imageoptim.com/mac) I was able to reduce the size by almost 90%.

Author: hmm ive stopped using image optim and just relied on the ruby plugin these days. it ran, so it seems like its still not the most optimal solution.

Reviewer: One thing to keep in mind is that images are only optimized the first time they are added. If you add an image, it gets compressed, and then you overwrite that image with a new export, it does not get compressed again. Could that be it?

Author: aha. ye i think that may be it actually.

    mobile = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/privacy-header-mobile.jpg"
    mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/privacy-header-mobile@2x.jpg"

>     alt-text = "Illustration of an eye, with a cross ontop of an ink blot background"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    alt-text = "Illustration of an eye, with a cross on top of an ink blot background"
```

    width = 1600
    height = 600
    layout = "full-width"
%}

# Transaction privacy

<!--
This page should inform about what information is made public when sending or receiving, how the application can help minimize unnecessary privacy leaks, basic application functionality to help, and when we can, more advanced options.
- Single-use addresses (avoiding address reuse)
- Coin selection / labelling
- Coin join / Pay join
-->

> It’s a common misconception that Bitcoin is anonymous. Instead, it is referred to as pseudonymous which means each address you generate is like a new identity. Unless you reveal that you are the owner whether directly or indirectly you are able to remain anonymous.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It’s a common misconception that Bitcoin is anonymous. Instead, it is referred to as pseudonymous, which means that each address you generate is like a new identity. Unless you reveal that you are the owner, whether directly or indirectly, you are able to remain anonymous.
```

Reviewer 2: Christoph's changes are good. Commit or resolve (this is outdated).

> When mined, transactions, their signatures, and addresses are public on the ledger, forever. There is no personally identifiable information attached to transactions on the blockchain though. The transparent property of the blockchain allows anyone to easily verify the amount of Bitcoin in existence but also makes looking up any address or transaction trivial. This can be demonstrated going back to the first block on [2009-01-03](https://blockstream.info/tx/4a5e1e4baab89f3a32518a88c31bc87f618f76673e2cc77ab2127b7afdeda33b), a transaction mined by Satoshi Nakamoto.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When mined, transactions, their signatures, and addresses become public on the ledger, forever. However, there is no personally identifiable information attached to transactions on the blockchain. The transparent property of the blockchain allows anyone to easily verify the amount of bitcoin in existence but also makes looking up any address or transaction trivial. This can be demonstrated going back to the first block on [2009-01-03](https://blockstream.info/tx/4a5e1e4baab89f3a32518a88c31bc87f618f76673e2cc77ab2127b7afdeda33b), a transaction mined by Satoshi Nakamoto.
```

> > Each Bitcoin transaction contains at least one input and at least one output. This means that once a single address is known, there is a trail to follow the Bitcoin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Each Bitcoin transaction contains at least one input and at least one output. This means that once a single address is known, there is a trail to follow the bitcoin.
```

> 
> <cite>As documented by <a href="https://docs.wasabiwallet.io/FAQ/FAQ-GeneralBitcoinPrivacy.html#how-is-bitcoin-bad-in-terms-of-privacy">Wasabi Wallet</a></cite>

> The key to keeping your transactions private is to prevent others from determining which addresses you own[^3]. Satoshi let others know that they mined the first block, which contained just one transaction, the block reward sent to their address. This illustrates the permanence of the association to an address and an identity. That being said, the pseudonym “Satoshi Nakamoto” also contributes to further anonymity. Once an address owner's identity is made public it becomes a difficult task to break the connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key to keeping your transactions private is to prevent others from determining which addresses you own[^3]. Satoshi let others know that they mined the first block, which contained just one transaction, with the block reward getting sent to their address. This illustrates the permanence of the association to an address and an identity. That being said, the pseudonym “Satoshi Nakamoto” also contributes to further anonymity. Once an address owner's identity is made public it becomes a difficult task to break the connection.
```

Reviewer 2: Good grammar suggestions, commit.

<!-- TODO: add graphic and heading that demonstrate points of compromise when transacting with bitcoin -->

## Methods to preserve privacy

Keeping private takes constant and diligent work but is not impossible to achieve an acceptable level of privacy[^1]. Let’s explore some methods and practices that can help preserve privacy on a transaction level.

<!-- talk about the problem as you are talking about the solution -->

### Generate a new address for each payment

> Creating new online personas is not the only way to preserve privacy. A new address can be generated by the wallet application to receive bitcoin. This is done using [HD Wallets]({{ "/guide/glossary/#hd-wallet" | relative_url }}), a standard for how private keys get generated in modern bitcoin applications. This allows each transaction not to be tied to a single address, making it more difficult to make an association to the owner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating new online personas is not the only way to preserve privacy. A new address can be generated by the wallet application used to receive bitcoin. This is achieved using [HD Wallets]({{ "/guide/glossary/#hd-wallet" | relative_url }}), a standard for how private keys get generated in modern bitcoin applications. This allows each transaction not to be tied to a single address, making it more difficult to make an association to the owner.
```

> > If thieves can see your income, holdings, and spending, they can use this information to target and exploit you.[^2]

Reviewer: No need for a footnote, you can use the blockquote author field for the link.

Reviewer 3: Fixed in https://github.com/BitcoinDesign/Guide/pull/349/commits/d9b82106d5ec388b3068fbe7bb73f452db4d3249

Assuming an adversary can uncover the identity behind the reused address there is now a single point for them to reach anyone else who has transacted with the owner.

<!--
TODO: Link / mention gap limit
TODO: Graphic / consider how to get the ui generating multiple addresses. make it easy for the user to not fail 

> ###### Worked Example 1 - Savings Revealed
> * You save in bitcoin, using a single-address paper wallet.
> * All your bitcoin savings to this same address, let's say it contains $1 million worth.
> * You buy a small amount of bitcoins to add to your savings, depositing in the paper wallet.
> * The person who sold you the bitcoins follows their trail on the blockchain and finds your paper wallet containing $1 million.
> * He mentions it to someone in a cafe or bar.
> * Word gets around. A burglar raids your home. Kidnappers capture your children and know exactly how much to demand in ransom.

-->

**Do's**

> - Make it easy to generate as many addresses as the receiver needs at a time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Make it easy to generate as many addresses as the receiver needs.
```

Reviewer: I like it when wallets automatically show you an unused address when you enter the receive screen.

Author: the "at a time" part is kinda important for this one, I admit it could be worded to read better though 🤔 .

I'm trying to say the receiver should have a way to generate multiple address and not have to wait for them to receive a payment.

Reviewer: Gotcha, I was a little confused by the wording. How about "as needed"?

Reviewer 4: Though can't address generation on the fly result in issues with gap-limits? https://blog.lopp.net/mind-the-bitcoin-address-gap/. Could lead to some bad UX. @pavlenex most likely has dealt with this with BTCPay

Author: Since there is no current content relating to this I would propose this being updated in a follow-up PR. It's something to link off to vs talking about on this page in any depth. 

Some content about gap limit + rescanning documented here; https://github.com/peakshift/bitcoin-ux/blob/master/payments/account-scanning.md

I think also @danielnordh may also be doing some related work.

Author: Opened up a PR for this #357

- Before broadcasting a transaction, inform senders if an address is already used.

**Don'ts**

- Make it easy to reuse an address.

> ### Keep track of who about knows about an address

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Keep track of who knows about an address
```

<div class="center" markdown="1">

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/coin-join.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/coin-join@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Example CoinJoin transaction with 3 participants with 1 input each, which get broken up into 5 equal outputs."
   width = 400
   height = 400
   layout = "float-right-desktop"
%}

The "common input ownership" heuristic assumes that in a transaction, it is most likely that all inputs belong to the same owner. [CoinJoins]({{ "/guide/glossary/#coinjoin" | relative_url }}) is a technique where multiple participants collaborate on a transaction to break this heuristic. It becomes more difficult (although not impossible) to determine who the individuals who own the outputs are since all the outputs typically have the same denomination. With CoinJoins, as with any other anonymity network, a large and diverse group of participants provides the best protection.

Users still have to be mindful of how the UTXOs they received from the CoinJoin are spent. For instance, spending them together in a single transaction would unravel the anonymity gains from participating in the CoinJoin.

> 

Reviewer: Can we maybe add some statement on whether this is easy or hard to design or implement, or how many wallets support this?

Author: @danielnordh thoughts on this one? not sure how to say if something is hard to design, since once the information is available and there are references it becomes easy. and we're trying to make the resources to make things easier.

Reviewer 2: Added a short statement.

While there is no perfect solution that will guarantee 100% privacy, try always to minimize how much information gets shared to the most essential. Also, consider ways to inform and prevent users of actions that negatively impact their privacy as they use your product.

<!--
There is no perfect solution to guarantee 100% privacy that lasts forever because things can be revealed over time. Since transactions are forever public, even if all precautions are taken at the time of payment to ensure the highest degree of anonymity, future behaviors of the wallet owner or transacting parties can still degrade previously attained privacy. A high amount of diligence is necessary whenever users are transacting with Bitcoin. The product should be able to guide, inform, and prevent them against privacy degrading actions.
-->

[^1]: [Bitcoin.org - Protecting your privacy](https://bitcoin.org/en/protect-your-privacy)
[^2]: [Wasabi Wallet Docs - Transaction Surveillance Companies](https://docs.wasabiwallet.io/why-wasabi/TransactionSurveillanceCompanies.html#attempt-to-invade-privacy)

> [^3]: [Top Seven Ways Your Identity Can Be Linked to Your Bitcoin Address](https://99bitcoins.com/know-more-top-seven-ways-your-identity-can-be-linked-to-your-bitcoin-address/)

Reviewer: Could add a link to further reading on the Bitcoin wiki, they have a great [page here](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Privacy).

---
layout: guide
title: Transaction privacy
description: An overview of how to help users maintain their financial privacy while using Bitcoin.
nav_order: 4
parent: Payments
permalink: /guide/payments/privacy/
main_classes: -no-top-padding
image: /assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/privacy-preview.jpg
---

{% include picture.html
    image = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/header.jpg"
    retina = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/header@2x.jpg"
    mobile = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/privacy-header-mobile.jpg"
    mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/privacy-header-mobile@2x.jpg"
    alt-text = "Illustration of an eye, with a cross on top of an ink blot background"
    width = 1600
    height = 600
    layout = "full-width"
%}

# Transaction privacy

<!--
This page should inform about what information is made public when sending or receiving, how the application can help minimize unnecessary privacy leaks, basic application functionality to help, and when we can, more advanced options.
- Single-use addresses (avoiding address reuse)
- Coin selection / labelling
- Coin join / Pay join
-->

> It’s a common misconception that Bitcoin is anonymous. Instead, it should be referred to as pseudonymous which means each address you generate is like a new identity. Unless you reveal that you are the owner whether directly or indirectly you are able to remain anonymous.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A common misconception is that Bitcoin payments are anonymous. Rather, Bitcoin payments are pseudonymous. This means each new bitcoin address acts like a new identity. 

These addresses can have a users real identity tied to them. This can happen willingly, say by sharing an address on your Facebook profile, or unwillingly, through block chain analysis tools.
```

Some copy suggestions. Should keep the focus on this being privacy in the context of payments - not just general Bitcoin privacy.

Reviewer 2: I was trying to correct "users" to "user's" but it seems to have messed up the commit suggestion, sorry :(

Reviewer 4: All good, think I fixed it

> Transactions, their signatures, and addresses after they are mined remain public on the ledger forever. However, there is no personally identifiable information attached to transactions on the blockchain. The transparent property of the blockchain allows anyone to easily verify the amount of bitcoin in existence which means it also makes looking up any address or transaction trivial. This can be demonstrated going back to the first block on [January 3, 2009](https://blockstream.info/tx/4a5e1e4baab89f3a32518a88c31bc87f618f76673e2cc77ab2127b7afdeda33b).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Transactions, their signatures, and addresses after they are mined remain on the public Bitcoin ledger forever. However, no personally identifiable information is tied to these transactions. The transparent property of the Bitcoin blockchain allows anyone to verify the amount of bitcoin in existence which means it also makes looking up any address or transaction trivial. This can be demonstrated going back to the first block mined on [January 3, 2009](https://blockstream.info/tx/4a5e1e4baab89f3a32518a88c31bc87f618f76673e2cc77ab2127b7afdeda33b).
```

> Each Bitcoin transaction contains at least one input and at least one output. This means that once a single address is known, there is a trail to follow the bitcoin.
> 
> <cite>As documented by <a href="https://docs.wasabiwallet.io/FAQ/FAQ-GeneralBitcoinPrivacy.html#how-is-bitcoin-bad-in-terms-of-privacy">Wasabi Wallet</a></cite>

> The key to keeping your transactions private is to prevent others from determining which addresses you own[^3]. Satoshi let others know that they mined the first block, which contained just one transaction, with the block reward getting sent to their address. This illustrates the permanence of the association to an address and an identity. That being said, the pseudonym “Satoshi Nakamoto” also contributes to further anonymity. While it's possible break asumptions of ownership going forward, the challenge is to recover privacy once an association is made public.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key to keeping your transactions private is to prevent others from determining which addresses you own[^3]. Satoshi let others know that they mined the first block, which contained just one transaction, with the block reward getting sent to their address. This illustrates the permanence of the association to an address and an identity. That being said, the pseudonym “Satoshi Nakamoto” also contributes to further anonymity. While it's possible to break assumptions of ownership going forward, the challenge is to recover privacy once an association is made public.
```

> The key to keeping your transactions private is to prevent others from determining which addresses you own[^3]. Satoshi let others know they mined the first block, which contained just one transaction, with the block reward getting sent to their address. This illustrates the possible permanence of association between an address and an identity. That being said, the pseudonym “Satoshi Nakamoto” also contributes to further anonymity. While it's possible break asumptions of ownership going forward, the challenge is to recover privacy once an association is made public.

Reviewer 4: Bit of a jump between using payments and transactions to describe the same thing - would be more consistent to stick with one rather than have a mix of both.

> The key to keeping your transactions private is to prevent others from determining which addresses you own[^3]. Satoshi let others know they mined the first block, which contained just one transaction, with the block reward getting sent to their address. This illustrates the possible permanence of association between an address and an identity. That being said, the pseudonym “Satoshi Nakamoto” also contributes to further anonymity. While it's possible break asumptions of ownership going forward, the challenge is to recover privacy once an association is made public.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The key to keeping your transactions private is to prevent others from determining which addresses you own[^3]. When Satoshi mined, and publicly broadcasted, they had mined the first Bitcoin block it contained just one transaction. The block reward was also sent to the miners (Satoshi's) address. From this, It would be safe to assume that Satoshi owns the address the coinbase transaction went to and the address that sent the first transaction. This illustrates an example of associating an address and an identity. Satoshi Nakamoto however had other privacy preserving practices in place such as using a pseudonym. While it's possible break asumptions of ownership going forward, the challenge is to recover privacy once an association is made public.
```

> The key to keeping your transactions private is to prevent others from determining which addresses you own[^3]. Satoshi let others know they mined the first block, which contained just one transaction, with the block reward getting sent to their address. This illustrates the possible permanence of association between an address and an identity. That being said, the pseudonym “Satoshi Nakamoto” also contributes to further anonymity. While it's possible break asumptions of ownership going forward, the challenge is to recover privacy once an association is made public.

Author: @Bosch-0 i define the transaction as a "contract" and payment as the movement of funds.

I documented some thoughts on this here. What do you think?

https://github.com/BitcoinDesign/Guide/discussions/121

> The key to keeping your transactions private is to prevent others from determining which addresses you own[^3]. Satoshi let others know they mined the first block, which contained just one transaction, with the block reward getting sent to their address. This illustrates the possible permanence of association between an address and an identity. That being said, the pseudonym “Satoshi Nakamoto” also contributes to further anonymity. While it's possible break asumptions of ownership going forward, the challenge is to recover privacy once an association is made public.

Reviewer 2: This commit suggestion is just a grammar fix, unrelated to transactions vs payments.
Go ahead and commit.

<!-- TODO: add graphic and heading that demonstrate points of compromise when transacting with bitcoin -->

## Methods to preserve privacy

> Keeping private takes constant and diligent work but is not impossible to ensure an acceptable level of privacy[^1]. Let’s explore some methods and practices that help preserve privacy on a transaction level.

Reviewer 4: I'd change this to ...Keeping Bitcoin payments private... good to keep the context going - things isn't as clear.

> Keeping private takes constant and diligent work but is not impossible to ensure an acceptable level of privacy[^1]. Let’s explore some methods and practices that help preserve privacy on a transaction level.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Keeping Bitcoin payments private takes constant and diligent work but is not impossible[^1]. Let’s explore some practices that help preserve privacy of your Bitcoin payments. 
```

> Keeping private takes constant and diligent work but is not impossible to ensure an acceptable level of privacy[^1]. Let’s explore some methods and practices that help preserve privacy on a transaction level.

Author: do you mean it's not focused and clear since it could mean; bitcoin privacy, bitcoin transaction privacy, or general privacy?

i think the statement stands true to any of the above still.

> Keeping private takes constant and diligent work but is not impossible to ensure an acceptable level of privacy[^1]. Let’s explore some methods and practices that help preserve privacy on a transaction level.

Reviewer 2: The page context is clear, and 'keeping things private' is better than 'keeping private'.
I'd say commit.

<!-- talk about the problem as you are talking about the solution -->

### Generate a new address for each payment

> Creating new online personas is not the only way to preserve privacy. A new address can be generated by the wallet application used to receive bitcoin. This is achieved using [HD Wallets]({{ "/guide/glossary/#hd-wallet" | relative_url }}), a standard for how private keys get generated in modern bitcoin applications. This allows each transaction not to be tied to a single address, making it difficult to associate with to the owner.

Author: need to go through my own checklist 😅

> If thieves can see your income, holdings, and spending, they can use this information to target and exploit you.[^2]

> Using the same address multiple times does not only degrade the privacy of just one transacting party. Both the [sender](/guide/payments/receive) and [receiver](/guide/payments/receive) are put at risk. On the receiver’s side, by using a single address, senders or anyone with whom the address is shared can see the previous activity and the amount of bitcoin controlled by the owner.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Using the same address multiple times does not only degrade the privacy of just one transacting party. Both the [sender](/guide/payments/send/) and [receiver](/guide/payments/receive) are put at risk. Re-using an address on the receivers side means anyone with whom that address is shared can see previous payments and the amount of bitcoin controlled by that address. 
```

You mention both sender and receiver are put at risk but only mention a risk related to the receiver, not sender.

Assuming an adversary uncovers the identity behind the reused address there is now a single point for them to reach anyone else who has transacted with the owner.

<!--
TODO: Link / mention gap limit
TODO: Graphic / consider how to get the ui generating multiple addresses. make it easy for the user to not fail 

> ###### Worked Example 1 - Savings Revealed
> * You save in bitcoin, using a single-address paper wallet.
> * All your bitcoin savings to this same address, let's say it contains $1 million worth.
> * You buy a small amount of bitcoins to add to your savings, depositing in the paper wallet.
> * The person who sold you the bitcoins follows their trail on the blockchain and finds your paper wallet containing $1 million.
> * He mentions it to someone in a cafe or bar.
> * Word gets around. A burglar raids your home. Kidnappers capture your children and know exactly how much to demand in ransom.

-->

> **Do's**

Reviewer 4: Should be more clear that these are design do's - the content before this doesn't add that context either.

Reviewer 2: The whole guide is about design and we use these do's and don'ts pretty consistently.

> - Show a new unused address when the receive screen is entered.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Show a new address when the receive screen is entered.
```

> **Do's**
> 
> - Show a new unused address when the receive screen is entered.
> - Make it easy to generate as many addresses as the receiver needs at a time.
> - Before broadcasting a transaction, inform senders if an address is already used.

Reviewer 3: Attempting to visually make things [consistent](https://deploy-preview-349--sad-borg-390916.netlify.app/guide/contribute/formatting/#facts).
```suggestion
{% include fact/pros.html %}
Show a new unused address when the receive screen is entered.
Make it easy to generate as many addresses as the receiver needs at a time.
Before broadcasting a transaction, inform senders if an address is already used.
{% include fact/close.html %}
```

> **Don'ts**
> 
> - Make it easy to reuse an address.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{% include fact/pros.html %}
Make it easy to reuse an address.
{% include fact/close.html %}
```

### Keep track of who knows about an address

<div class="center" markdown="1">

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/address-labeling.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/address-labeling@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "A list of addresses with tags. Two are red, two are purple and one is blue"
   width = 400
   height = 400
   layout = "float-right-desktop"
%}

When [receiving bitcoin]({{ "/guide/payments/receive/" | relative_url }}) we can [add additional details to a payment]({{ "/guide/payments/receive/#inputting-additional-payment-details" | relative_url }}). Not only does this help to contextualize payments, but it also enables preventative measures for preserving privacy. Labeling addresses with the counterparty's name involved in each transaction can inform decisions for which [UTXOs]({{ "/guide/glossary/#unspent-transaction-output-utxo" | relative_url }}) are selected in future transaction inputs.

> To make this UTXO selection easier, some interfaces make it possible to select/filter UTXOs that cluster under one label.

Reviewer 4: Could add an image here showcasing bluewallets UTXO management? 

After talking last night I think a page dedicated to UTXO management is probably needed in the payments section...

Reviewer 2: UTXO page should be this PR https://github.com/BitcoinDesign/Guide/pull/90

<div class="center" markdown="1">

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/coin-join.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/coin-join@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Example CoinJoin transaction with 3 participants with 1 input each, which get broken up into 5 equal outputs."
   width = 400
   height = 400
   layout = "float-right-desktop"
%}

The "common input ownership" heuristic[^4] assumes in a transaction, it is likely that all inputs belong to the same owner. [CoinJoins]({{ "/guide/glossary/#coinjoin" | relative_url }}) is a technique where multiple participants collaborate on a transaction to break this heuristic. It becomes more difficult (although not impossible) to determine the individuals who own the outputs are since all the outputs typically have the same denomination. With CoinJoins, as with any other anonymity network, a large and diverse group of participants provides the best protection.

Users still have to be mindful of how the UTXOs they received from the CoinJoin are spent. For instance, spending them together in a single transaction would unravel the anonymity gains from participating in the CoinJoin.

</div>

> ### Design with privacy in mind

Reviewer 4: This page's context is a bit confusing - is it about privacy in the context of payments (as it part of the payments chapter) or Bitcoin privacy application wide? I think the context needs to applied more throughout. 

It makes more sense to intertwine our principles into all the pages content rather than have separate pages that cover a principle. e.g. instead of a 'privacy payments' page we integrate this privacy content into the send/receive pages.

Reviewer 2: The send and receive pages should definitely mention/implement/not contradict the content here, but I still believe it reads well having a dedicated page to this subject.

Thinking about privacy is critical during the design process. Your users will not have the same level of knowledge of how to use Bitcoin privately. It becomes especially important for them to understand the implications of their privacy degrading actions which often occur at the point of creating a transaction or requesting a payment. When managing funds 

> While there is no perfect solution that will guarantee 100% privacy, try always to minimize how much information gets shared to the most essential. Also, consider ways to inform and prevent user actions that negatively impact their privacy as they use your product.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While there is no perfect solution that will guarantee 100% privacy, try to minimize how much information gets shared to the most essential. Also, consider ways to inform and prevent user actions that negatively impact their privacy as they use your product.
```

parent: Payments
permalink: /guide/payments/privacy/
main_classes: -no-top-padding
image: /assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/privacy-preview.jpg
---

{% include picture.html
    image = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/header.jpg"
    retina = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/header@2x.jpg"
    mobile = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/privacy-header-mobile.jpg"
    mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/privacy-header-mobile@2x.jpg"
    alt-text = "Illustration of an eye, with a cross on top of an ink blot background"
    width = 1600
    height = 600
    layout = "full-width"
%}

# Transaction privacy

<!--
This page should inform about what information is made public when sending or receiving, how the application can help minimize unnecessary privacy leaks, basic application functionality to help, and when we can, more advanced options.

- Single-use addresses (avoiding address reuse)
- Coin selection / labelling
- Coin join / Pay join

@TODO: address reuse / there should be something in here about also mindfully not giving the same unused address to different persons
@TODO: address reuse / write glossary term about Gap limit  
-->

> It’s a common misconception that Bitcoin is anonymous. Instead, it should be referred to as pseudonymous, which means that each address you generate is like a new identity. Unless your ownership is revealed, whether directly by yourself or indirectly by some third-party you are able to remain anonymous.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It’s a common misconception that Bitcoin payments are anonymous. Instead, they can be referred to as pseudonymous, this means that who owns a freshly generated addresses is not public knowledge. Unless your ownership is revealed, whether directly by yourself or indirectly by some third-party you are able to remain anonymous.
```

> Transactions, their signatures, and addresses added to the Bitcoin blockchain remain public forever. This means that looking up any address or transaction is trivial, as demonstrated by going back to the very first block mined on [January 3, 2009](https://blockstream.info/tx/4a5e1e4baab89f3a32518a88c31bc87f618f76673e2cc77ab2127b7afdeda33b). While all transactions are public, there is however no personal identification about the address owners stored on the blockchain itself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Transactions, their signatures, and addresses added to the Bitcoin blockchain remain public forever. This means that looking up any address or transaction is trivial, as demonstrated by going back to the very first block mined on [January 3, 2009](https://blockstream.info/tx/4a5e1e4baab89f3a32518a88c31bc87f618f76673e2cc77ab2127b7afdeda33b). 

While all transactions are public, there is no personal identification about the address owners stored on the blockchain itself.
```

> Transactions, their signatures, and addresses after they are mined remain public on the Bitcoin blockchain forever. However, there is no personally identifiable information attached to transactions on the blockchain. The transparent property of the blockchain allows anyone to easily verify the amount of bitcoin in existence, which means it also makes looking up any address or transaction trivial. This can be demonstrated going back to the first block mined on [January 3, 2009](https://blockstream.info/tx/4a5e1e4baab89f3a32518a88c31bc87f618f76673e2cc77ab2127b7afdeda33b).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Transactions, their signatures, and addresses added to the Bitcoin blockchain remain public forever. This means that looking up any address or transaction is trivial, as demonstrated by going back to the very first block mined on [January 3, 2009](https://blockstream.info/tx/4a5e1e4baab89f3a32518a88c31bc87f618f76673e2cc77ab2127b7afdeda33b). While all transactions are public, there is however no personal identification about the address owners stored on the blockchain itself.
```

> Each Bitcoin transaction contains at least one input and at least one output. This means that once a single address is known, there is a trail to follow the bitcoin.
> 
> <cite>As documented by <a href="https://docs.wasabiwallet.io/FAQ/FAQ-GeneralBitcoinPrivacy.html#how-is-bitcoin-bad-in-terms-of-privacy">Wasabi Wallet</a></cite>

> The key to keeping your transactions private is to prevent others from determining which addresses you own[^3]. Satoshi let others know they mined the first block, which contained just one transaction, with the block reward getting sent to their address. This illustrates the possible permanence of association between an address and an identity. That being said, the pseudonym “Satoshi Nakamoto” also contributes to further anonymity. While it's possible to break assumptions of ownership going forward, the challenge is to recover privacy once an association is made public.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The key to keeping your transactions private is to prevent others from determining which addresses you own[^3]. When Satoshi let others know that they had mined the first block, which contained a single transaction, one can deduce that both the address that received the block reward and the sender address in the transaction belongs to Satoshi. This illustrates the permanence of associations between addresses and identity. While it's possible to break assumptions of ownership going forward, the challenge is to recover privacy once an association is made public. That being said, in this case the pseudonym “Satoshi Nakamoto” has yet to be associated with any personal identity. 
```

<!-- TODO: add graphic and heading that demonstrate points of compromise when transacting with bitcoin -->

## Methods to preserve privacy

Keeping Bitcoin payments private takes constant and diligent work but is not impossible[^1]. Let’s explore some practices that help preserve privacy of your Bitcoin payments. 

<!-- talk about the problem as you are talking about the solution -->

### Generate a new address for each payment

Creating new online personas is not the only way to preserve privacy. A new address can be generated by the wallet application used to receive bitcoin. This is achieved using [HD Wallets]({{ "/guide/glossary/#hd-wallet" | relative_url }}), a standard for how private keys get generated in modern Bitcoin applications. This allows each transaction not to be tied to a single address, making it difficult to associate with to the owner.

> Using the same address multiple times does not only degrade the privacy of just one transacting party. Both the [sender](/guide/payments/receive) and [receiver](/guide/payments/receive) are put at risk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Address re-use degrades the privacy of both the [sending](/guide/payments/send/) and [receiving](/guide/payments/receive) parties. Re-using an address on the receivers side means anyone with whom that address is shared can see previous payments and the amount of bitcoin controlled by that address. Likewise, the sender is revealing any previous transactions by their sending address.
```

> > If thieves can see your income, holdings, and spending, they can use this information to target and exploit you[^2]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> If bad actors can see your income, holdings, and spending, they can use this information to target and exploit you[^2]
```

To make this UTXO selection easier, some interfaces make it possible to select/filter UTXOs that cluster under one label.

_Check out the glossary to learn more about [how coin control works]({{ "/guide/glossary/#coin-control" | relative_url }})._

</div>

### Increase anonymity by collaborating with others

<div class="center" markdown="1">

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/coin-join.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/coin-join@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Example CoinJoin transaction with 3 participants with 1 input each, which get broken up into 5 equal outputs."
   width = 400
   height = 400
   layout = "float-right-desktop"
%}

> The "common input ownership" heuristic[^4] assumes that all inputs in a transaction likely belong to the same owner. [CoinJoins]({{ "/guide/glossary/#coinjoin" | relative_url }}) is a technique where multiple participants collaborate on a transaction to break this heuristic. It becomes more difficult (although not impossible) to determine the individuals who own the outputs are since all the outputs typically have the same denomination. With CoinJoins, as with any other anonymity network, a large and diverse group of participants provides the best protection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The "common input ownership" heuristic[^4] assumes that all inputs in a transaction likely belong to the same owner. [CoinJoins]({{ "/guide/glossary/#coinjoin" | relative_url }}) is an advanced technique, where multiple participants collaborate on a transaction to break this heuristic. It becomes more difficult (although not impossible) to determine the individuals who own the outputs are since all the outputs typically have the same denomination. With CoinJoins, as with any other anonymity network, a large and diverse group of participants provides the best protection. CoinJoins are not yet widely supported by Bitcoin applications.
```

> The "common input ownership" heuristic[^4] assumes in a transaction, it is likely that all inputs belong to the same owner. [CoinJoins]({{ "/guide/glossary/#coinjoin" | relative_url }}) is a technique where multiple participants collaborate on a transaction to break this heuristic. It becomes more difficult (although not impossible) to determine the individuals who own the outputs are since all the outputs typically have the same denomination. With CoinJoins, as with any other anonymity network, a large and diverse group of participants provides the best protection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The "common input ownership" heuristic[^4] assumes that all inputs in a transaction likely belong to the same owner. [CoinJoins]({{ "/guide/glossary/#coinjoin" | relative_url }}) is a technique where multiple participants collaborate on a transaction to break this heuristic. It becomes more difficult (although not impossible) to determine the individuals who own the outputs are since all the outputs typically have the same denomination. With CoinJoins, as with any other anonymity network, a large and diverse group of participants provides the best protection.
```

> The "common input ownership" heuristic[^4] assumes in a transaction, it is likely that all inputs belong to the same owner. [CoinJoins]({{ "/guide/glossary/#coinjoin" | relative_url }}) is a technique where multiple participants collaborate on a transaction to break this heuristic. It becomes more difficult (although not impossible) to determine the individuals who own the outputs are since all the outputs typically have the same denomination. With CoinJoins, as with any other anonymity network, a large and diverse group of participants provides the best protection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The "common input ownership" heuristic[^4] assumes in a transaction, it is likely that all inputs belong to the same owner. [CoinJoins]({{ "/guide/glossary/#coinjoin" | relative_url }}) is an advanced technique, not yet supported by many applications, where multiple participants collaborate on a transaction to break this heuristic. It becomes more difficult (although not impossible) to determine the individuals who own the outputs are since all the outputs typically have the same denomination. With CoinJoins, as with any other anonymity network, a large and diverse group of participants provides the best protection.
```

-->

It’s a common misconception that Bitcoin payments are anonymous. Instead, they can be referred to as pseudonymous, this means that who owns a freshly generated addresses is not public knowledge. Unless your ownership is revealed, whether directly by yourself or indirectly by some third-party you are able to remain anonymous.

Transactions, their signatures, and addresses added to the Bitcoin blockchain remain public forever. This means that looking up any address or transaction is trivial, as demonstrated by going back to the very first block mined on [January 3, 2009](https://blockstream.info/tx/4a5e1e4baab89f3a32518a88c31bc87f618f76673e2cc77ab2127b7afdeda33b). 

While all transactions are public, there is no personal identification about the address owners stored on the blockchain itself.

> Each Bitcoin transaction contains at least one input and at least one output. This means that once a single address is known, there is a trail to follow the bitcoin.
> 
> <cite>As documented by <a href="https://docs.wasabiwallet.io/FAQ/FAQ-GeneralBitcoinPrivacy.html#how-is-bitcoin-bad-in-terms-of-privacy">Wasabi Wallet</a></cite>

> The key to keeping your transactions private is to prevent others from determining which addresses you own[^3]. When Satoshi let others know that they had mined the first block, which contained a single transaction, one can deduce that both the address that received the block reward and the sender address in the transaction belongs to Satoshi. This illustrates the permanence of associations between addresses and identity. While it's possible to break assumptions of ownership going forward, the challenge is to recover privacy once an association is made public. That being said, in this case the pseudonym “Satoshi Nakamoto” has yet to be associated with any personal identity. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The key to keeping your transactions private is to prevent others from determining which addresses you own[^3]. Since Satoshi let others know that they had mined the first block, which contained a single transaction, one can deduce that both the address that received the block reward and the sender address in the transaction belongs to Satoshi. This illustrates the permanence of associations between addresses and identity. While it's possible to break assumptions of ownership going forward, the challenge is to recover privacy once an association is made public. That being said, in this case the pseudonym “Satoshi Nakamoto” has yet to be associated with any personal identity. 
```

<!-- TODO: add graphic and heading that demonstrate points of compromise when transacting with bitcoin -->

## Methods to preserve privacy

> Keeping Bitcoin payments private takes constant and diligent work but is not impossible[^1]. Let’s explore some practices that help preserve privacy of your Bitcoin payments. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Keeping Bitcoin payments private takes constant and diligent work but is not impossible[^1]. Let’s explore some practices that help preserve privacy of your users' Bitcoin payments. 
```

> Keeping Bitcoin payments private takes constant and diligent work but is not impossible[^1]. Let’s explore some practices that help preserve privacy of your users' Bitcoin payments. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are many ways your identity might get connected to your addresses[^1],so keeping Bitcoin payments private takes diligent work but is not impossible. Let’s explore some practices that help preserve privacy of your users' Bitcoin payments. 
```

<!-- talk about the problem as you are talking about the solution -->

### Generate a new address for each payment

> Creating new online personas is not the only way to preserve privacy. A new address can be generated by the wallet application used to receive bitcoin. This is achieved using [HD Wallets]({{ "/guide/glossary/#hd-wallet" | relative_url }}), a standard for how private keys get generated in modern Bitcoin applications. This allows each transaction not to be tied to a single address, making it difficult to associate with to the owner.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A new address should be generated by the wallet application any time the user wants to receive bitcoin. This is achieved using [HD Wallets]({{ "/guide/glossary/#hd-wallet" | relative_url }}), a standard in modern Bitcoin applications that can generate and manage an infinite number of addresses without revealing their common root. This allows each incoming transaction to use a new address that is unconnected to any other in the wallet, making it difficult to associate with the owner.
```

> A new address should be generated by the wallet application any time the user wants to receive bitcoin. This is achieved using [HD Wallets]({{ "/guide/glossary/#hd-wallet" | relative_url }}), a standard in modern Bitcoin applications that can generate and manage an infinite number of addresses without revealing their common root. This allows each incoming transaction to use a new address that is unconnected to any other in the wallet, making it difficult to associate with the owner.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A new address should be generated by the wallet application any time the user wants to receive bitcoin. This is achieved by using [HD Wallets]({{ "/guide/glossary/#hd-wallet" | relative_url }}), a standard in modern Bitcoin applications that can generate and manage an infinite number of addresses without revealing their common root. This allows each incoming transaction to use a new address that is unconnected to any other in the wallet, making it difficult to associate with the owner.
```

> Address re-use degrades the privacy of both the [sending](/guide/payments/send/) and [receiving](/guide/payments/receive) parties. Re-using an address on the receivers side means anyone with whom that address is shared can see previous payments and the amount of bitcoin controlled by that address. Likewise, the sender is revealing any previous transactions by their sending address.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Address re-use degrades the privacy of both the [sending](/guide/payments/send/) and [receiving](/guide/payments/receive) parties. Re-using an address on the receivers side means that anyone with whom that address is shared can see previous payments and the amount of bitcoin controlled by that address. Likewise, the sender is revealing any previous transactions by their sending address.
```

> Address re-use degrades the privacy of both the [sending](/guide/payments/send/) and [receiving](/guide/payments/receive) parties. Re-using an address on the receivers side means that anyone with whom that address is shared can see previous payments and the amount of bitcoin controlled by that address. Likewise, the sender is revealing any previous transactions by their sending address.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Address re-use degrades the privacy of both the [sending](/guide/payments/send/) and [receiving](/guide/payments/receive) parties. Re-using an address on the receivers side means that anyone with whom that address is shared can see previous payments and the amount of bitcoin controlled by that address. 
```

> If bad actors can see your income, holdings, and spending, they can use this information to target and exploit you[^2]

> By _sending_ to an address that is being reused, assuming an adversary uncovers the identity behind the owner there is now a single point for them to reach anyone else who has transacted with the address.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By _sending_ to an address that is being reused, the sender is now traceable and connected to any previous transactions the receiver has made with that address. This increases the risk of exposure to an adversary.
```

> On the receiver’s side, by using a single address, the sender or anyone with whom the address is shared can see the previous activity and the amount of bitcoin controlled by the owner. By _sending_ to an address that is being reused, assuming an adversary uncovers the identity behind the owner there is now a single point for them to reach anyone else who has transacted with the address.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By _sending_ to an address that is being reused, assuming an adversary uncovers the identity behind the owner there is now a single point for them to reach anyone else who has transacted with the address.
```

<!--
TODO: Link / mention gap limit
TODO: Graphic / consider how to get the ui generating multiple addresses. make it easy for the user to not fail 

> ###### Worked Example 1 - Savings Revealed
> * You save in bitcoin, using a single-address paper wallet.
> * All your bitcoin savings to this same address, let's say it contains $1 million worth.
> * You buy a small amount of bitcoins to add to your savings, depositing in the paper wallet.
> * The person who sold you the bitcoins follows their trail on the blockchain and finds your paper wallet containing $1 million.
> * He mentions it to someone in a cafe or bar.
> * Word gets around. A burglar raids your home. Kidnappers capture your children and know exactly how much to demand in ransom.

-->

{% include fact/dos.html %}

> - Show a new address when the receive screen is entered.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Generate a new address any time the user wants to receive bitcoin
```

> - Make it easy to generate as many addresses as the receiver needs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Make it easy to generate as many addresses as the receiver needs
```

> - Before broadcasting a transaction, inform senders if an address is already used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Warn the user if an address has already been used before broadcasting a transaction
```

{% include fact/close.html %}

{% include fact/donts.html %}
- Make it easy to reuse an address.
{% include fact/close.html %}

### Keep track of who knows about an address

<div class="center" markdown="1">

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/address-labeling.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/address-labeling@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "A list of addresses with tags. Two are red, two are purple and one is blue"
   width = 400
   height = 400
   layout = "float-right-desktop"
%}

When [receiving bitcoin]({{ "/guide/payments/receive/" | relative_url }}) we can [add additional details to a payment]({{ "/guide/payments/receive/#inputting-additional-payment-details" | relative_url }}). Not only does this help to contextualize payments, but it also enables preventative measures for preserving privacy. Labeling addresses with the counterparty's name involved in each transaction can inform decisions for which [UTXOs]({{ "/guide/glossary/#unspent-transaction-output-utxo" | relative_url }}) are selected in future transaction inputs.

> To make this UTXO selection easier, some interfaces make it possible to select/filter UTXOs that cluster under one label.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some applications make it possible to filter UTXOs by label to make such selections easier.
```
```suggestion
To make this UTXO selection easier, some interfaces make it possible to select/filter UTXOs that cluster under one label.
```

> _Check out the glossary to learn more about [how coin control works]({{ "/guide/glossary/#coin-control" | relative_url }})._

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

</div>

### Increase anonymity by collaborating with others

<div class="center" markdown="1">

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/coin-join.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/payments/privacy/coin-join@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Example CoinJoin transaction with 3 participants with 1 input each, which get broken up into 5 equal outputs."
   width = 400
   height = 400

>    layout = "float-right-desktop"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   layout = "float-right-desktop"
   caption = "CoinJoin transactions attempt to make payments more private by mixing inputs from many senders and outputs to many receivers."
```

%}

> The "common input ownership" heuristic[^4] assumes that all inputs in a transaction likely belong to the same owner. [CoinJoins]({{ "/guide/glossary/#coinjoin" | relative_url }}) is an advanced technique, where multiple participants collaborate on a transaction to break this heuristic. It becomes more difficult (although not impossible) to determine the individuals who own the outputs are since all the outputs typically have the same denomination. With CoinJoins, as with any other anonymity network, a large and diverse group of participants provides the best protection. CoinJoins are not yet widely supported by Bitcoin applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[CoinJoins]({{ "/guide/glossary/#coinjoin" | relative_url }}) is an advanced technique, where multiple participants collaborate on a transaction to break the "common input ownership" heuristic[^4], which assumes that all inputs in a transaction likely belong to the same owner. In a CoinJoin transaction all the inputs tend to be of the same amount. This makes it harder to define which input paid which output, effectively braking the absolute traceability of bitcoin transactions. As with any other anonymity network, a large and diverse group of participants will be more effective in disassociating the connections. CoinJoins are not yet widely supported by Bitcoin applications.
```

Users still have to be mindful of how the UTXOs they received from the CoinJoin are spent. For instance, spending them together in a single transaction would unravel the anonymity gains from participating in the CoinJoin.

</div>

### Design with privacy in mind

> Thinking about privacy is critical during the design process. Your users will not have the same level of knowledge of how to use Bitcoin privately. It becomes especially important for them to understand the implications of their privacy degrading actions which often occur at the point of creating a transaction or requesting a payment. When managing funds 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thinking about privacy is critical during the design process. Your users will not have the same level of knowledge of how to use Bitcoin privately. 

It is especially important to help them understand any actions that might impact their privacy. Most of the risks occur at the point of creating a transaction or requesting a payment, and we should try to design solutions that reduce the risk of unknowingly degrading privacy.
```

> While there is no perfect solution that will guarantee 100% privacy, try to minimize how much information gets shared to the most essential. Also, consider ways to inform and prevent user actions that negatively impact their privacy as they use your product.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While there is no perfect solution that will guarantee 100% privacy, try to minimize how much information gets shared to the most essential. Consider ways to inform and prevent user actions that negatively impact their privacy as they use your product.
```
